So we've discussed what 3D medical images are and
the advantages they can have over 2D medical images.
Let's now cover who uses 3D medical images,
as you will likely be working alongside them if you choose to
become more seriously involved in AI-driven imaging applications.
Let's start with a simplified overview of the most common end users of medical imaging.
For the sake of this discussion,
let's call them user archetypes.
First, there's the primary care provider.
This person is often the first person a patient will see.
A primary care provider will identify the patient's chief concern,
develop a list of possibilities as to what's going on,
called the differential diagnosis,
and will order both imaging and non-imaging tests as necessary to refine their diagnosis.
A primary care provider may use
imaging studies to screen their otherwise healthy patients for
certain conditions such as a low dose chest CT for
lung cancer screening if a patient has particular risk factors,
or CT colonography to screen for colon cancer.
Moreover, they may order an imaging study
for common problems that may need further characterization,
for example, an ankle MRI in someone who has
twisted their ankle and has not improved over a few weeks.
Patients who require more complex or specialized care are often
referred by their primary care physician to what we'll refer to as a specialist.
We'll use this as a general term for any doctor who has
specialized in a particular organ system or disease,
such as a neurologist for the nervous system,
cardiologist for the heart,
or oncologist for cancer, for instance.
Specialists will often use advanced medical imaging studies as
supplementary tests to really hone down on their diagnosis.
For those specialists treating longer-term diseases such as
cancer will use images over time to track the patient's disease course.
Not all imaging use cases are diagnostic, however.
For example, surgeons in procedure-heavy specialties such as
interventional radiology will use images to guide surgeries and other procedures
either through intraprocedural imaging or through the registration of
previously obtained images to
the patient and the surgical instruments in the surgical suite,
and align them to obtain real time feedback of their instrument location.
Of course, there's the radiologist,
a doctor who specializes in medical imaging and uses
their expertise to assist consulting colleagues throughout the patient care process.
Radiologists advise colleagues on
the best imaging study to obtain for a given clinical condition,
work with imaging technologists to tune and optimize imaging parameters and protocols,
interpret the acquired images,
rendering a report of their findings and impression,
and deliver that critical information to consulting colleagues.
Often, radiologists will also perform a multitude of image-guided procedures.
So that's a broad overview of some of the most common end users.
Let's put this information together in a practical clinical scenario.
As the scenario goes on,
try to identify some of the most common use cases for medical imaging,
such as diagnosis, procedural guidance,
and assessing response to treatment.
Though this list isn't exhaustive,
it's a solid foundation and comprises most of the day-to-day workflows.